# verb

> Verb makes it easy to build project documentation using simple markdown templates, with zero configuration required.

Exactly like the one on Star Trek. But instead of "stun" and "kill", this Verb generates markdown documentation, making it hands-down the most deadly markdown documentation generator on the planet (and probably others ones too).

Please [report any bugs or feature requests](https://github.com/assemble/verb/issues/new), thanks!

## Install
#### Install with [npm](npmjs.org)

```bash
npm i -g verb --save-dev
```

Now that verb is installed, add `README.tmpl.md` to the `docs/` dir in your project (this is all customizable, but let's keep it simple here), and add this to the file:

```markdown
# {%= name %}

> {%= description %}

## Getting started
Install with [npm](npmjs.org) `npm i -g {%= name %} --save-dev`

## Options
{%= docs("options") %}

## Examples
{%= docs("examples") %}

## Author
+ {%= author.name %}

## License
{%= copyright() %}
{%= license() %}
```

Next, run:

```bash
verb
```

That wasn't so hard, was it? (It was? [Try downloading Verb instead](https://github.com/assemble/verb/archive/master.zip))

## About
### How does Verb work?

Upon running the `docs` command, unless instructed to do otherwise Verb will attempt to build any markdown templates found in the `docs/` directory of your project, using the data from project's package.json as context.

For many users, Verb might only be used to [build the readme](#TODO: link to readme example) for projects, so that project metadata such as version, date, changelog and so on, are always current and consistent. See the [Verb generator](https://github.com/jonschlinkert/generator-docs) for examples.

**Beyond the basics**

For users who want more than the basics, Verb is also highly configurable via options and offers an [extensive API](#TODO: add link to API docs) for developers who want to add functionality in the form of plugins, middleware, custom tags, filters and so on.

### Why use Verb?

We all know that documenation can be one of the most challenging and time-consuming aspects of maintaining a project. Even for small projects, simply writing and organizing the content on a readme can take more time than it did to create the library itself.

> Verb dramatically reduces the time and effort involved in maintaining markdown docs for code projects through the use of powerful utilities and tools, well-defined conventions, and sensible defaults that are specifically tuned to maintaining projects on GitHub.

For starters, this is accomplished by:

1. Using templates for any sections or text than can be generaralize, such as _badges_, _license_, _copyright_, _author_, _Table of Contents_ and so on.
1. Allowing includes (partials) to be used, so that longer documents can be easily organized and broken down into logical topics or groupings.
1. Pulling in data from package.json to pass as context to any templates. Custom data sources may be used as well.
1. Using boilerplates to kickstart the documentation for new projects. The [Verb generator]() for Yeoman comes with a handful of boilerplates, but it's super easy to create and use your own.

### Ease of Use

> Verb loves users

Verb's number one priorty is ease-of use. For new users **zero configuration** is required to get started. Once Verb is installed, simply enter `docs` in command line, and you're off and running.

For more experienced users, Verb offers _more than 50 template tags and filters, includes and partial caching, comment parsing, YAML Front Matter (or Coffee Front Matter!), plugins, mixins, tons of helpful JavaScript and Node.js utilites_, and lots more.

### API

> Verb also loves developers

Verb has an extensive API and tools for building plugins, custom tags and filters, or extending Verb in other ways.

## Features

* Lo-Dash templates and mixins
* The full power of JavaScript
* Filters
* Tags
* Partial Caching
* Mixins
* Templates can be used directly, cached as JavaScript, and/or via `require` statements
* Uses [gray-matter][] to support both YAML Front Matter and Coffee Front Matter
* Easily add a **Table of Contents** to any file
* Generate a **multi-file Table of Contents**, along with relative links to each file AND section
* Comment parsing (basic)
* Extensive API
* File-system Utilities
* Logging
* Lots more! So much more. Much much more. So much more that you don't even know how much more it's so much. I don't know where to start.

### FAQ

* **Why does Verb use the `{%= foo %}` syntax for templates?**: We do this to avoid collision with the more common, default syntax for Lo-Dash templates, `<%= foo %>`. Of course, nothing if foolproof, so if the default delimiters don't work for your needs you can customize them in the options.

## License
Copyright (c) 2014 Jon Schlinkert, contributors.
Released under the MIT license

***

_This file was generated by [Verb](https://github.com/assemble/verb) on March 14, 2014._